Okay welcome or welcome back to WordPress
Accessibility Day everyone. My name is
Amanda. I'm based here in Cleveland Ohio. It
is not yet daylight out so it seems a bit dark
and I will be your host for the next three
sessions here. I have the honor of introducing the
next session which is the Digital Transformation
or the Social Digital Transformation with Merary
Alvarado. A little bit about Merary. She is a
software engineer and accessibility evangelist
with six plus years of proven experience in
executing development and leading accessibility
processes in digital strategies for Fortune 100
clients. She has collaborated, collaborated to
create national standards and best practices
to be applicable across Costa Rica for digital
educational and physical environments to improve
their independent living. She is the co-lead of
the Accessibility Web Costa Rica a public group on
Facebook which develops digital content, training,
conferences, events webinars in Spanish to create
awareness about the importance of accessibility in
the digital era. So welcome to Merary, very excited
to hear her talk. Please feel free to add your
questions to the YouTube chat feed there and we
can answer those at the end. So let's get started.
[Merary] Perfect so thank you
very much for that introduction.
I would like to start sharing my screen right now.
Okay so, thank you so much for that introduction.
I'm really happy to be here participating right
now in this event because it's the first
one. I'm, I'm really happy to be participant
because it's important at least for Costa Rica
because we are from a Latin American country
being presenting today here
is really really great for us.
So accessibility as a Digital Transformation
or Social Digital Transformation. What do we,
what we can say about that. So I would like
to start telling a story. When I was 16 years
old I was sat down at the first row at a
bus just waiting to go to the high school.
And suddenly, one woman stood up in front of
the door bus caring a baby. She
was started talking with her hands and I didn't
understand. I was shocked, neither the bus driver
he was shocked as well. And suddenly the answer
of the bus driver was close the door in her face.
I just remembered the feeling to, to feel so
bad going to the high school and I couldn't
forget her face behind the door with the baby.
She wait for a couple of seconds and then leave.
That experience for me was important and in terms
of disabilities it was my first experience talking
or interacting with a person with disabilities.
Even though I was 16 years old I didn't have
the opportunity to talk before, with any
person with disabilities, at that moment
with a deaf person. One of the funny things
is that after like 10 years I met Martha.
Martha was that woman that was at that
time, at that moment and she assigned me
right now the sign that we have in Costa Rica. She
gave me my name for the deaf community. So I would
like to say thank you very much for being here
to watching my presentation. I'm super happy you
are here in YouTube just watching that. So I would
like to start saying one thing. There is important
to mention a couple of important concepts
that we need to understand when we are talking
about accessibility. Sometimes we assume that
accessibility is just technical aspects, but I
think implied it implies more other concepts. For
example, the first one that I would like to start
mentioning is Inclusive Economy and you probably
said, I'm sorry Merary we are talking about
accessibility. So what Inclusive Economy needs
to be related with that conversation? Well a lot.
When we are talking about inclusive economies we
are talking about the violence to include all
people, doesn't matter the background, doesn't
matter the level or savings in technology
or the way uh the color looks like, the gender,
doesn't matter. Neither the disability. So that's
why uh talking about inclusive economy is
important, because we are entrepreneurs,
we have businesses, we lead some projects and
thinking about this is we're really important
to create more accessible products and services
to many users as possible and of course try
to be more inclusive with all of users. Now
one of the other important concepts that
we need to understand is Disability. Because
if we want to create the accessible content,
we need to understand what disability means. And
actually an accessibility, well sorry disability,
is complex. It's not easy to understand.
It has too many variables and we definitely
understand that. But one of the things that I
really need to mention here or to recall is that
disability is not the problem. We need
to understand what disability means, but
disability is not the problem, is usually the
infrastructure the way that we create the sites,
uh the type of services. If they are so
complex. So we need to create more things that
are accessible. So that's why it's important to
mention that the complexity of those combinations
like the disability concept and also what
we have around of us, it's important. So I
would like to make a question. What do you
understand about disabilities? We already
read about the disability meaning, but what
do you understand about disability? Because
if you don't understand the concept in the way
that we expect it, we cannot create accessible
websites. And you probably said, what what
are you talking about? Well, usually when we
think about disabilities we think and we think
about disabilities with different perceptions.
We have some bias or we have assumptions. We
usually think about disability in different
levels. For example, in Costa Rica sometimes I
heard that said, oh poor babies, poor angels.
And we are limiting people with disabilities
to access some information, because we are
not properly understanding what disability means.
And for example, we we usually associate that
disabilities are always people who is deaf or who
is blind or who have some physical disabilities,
but we have a range of many disability
types that we need to understand as well.
And other things that is most related to business
is probably in our team or in in in our project,
we have a more accessible culture. But what about
our clients, what about their business owners,
what about our team members, what they think
about disability. So they are understanding what
is disability and why is important accessibility,
when they are creating wire-frames, for example,
or they are creating websites. So that's important
to mention. So I would like to just talk as a high
level about the different disabilities that we
have. We have the permanent one which is the one
that we can see. We can see people who is blind
or people who is deaf or people with mobility
impairments. That's the permanent one. Then we
have the other which is the one the temporary.
For example, you are fan of rugby, martial
arts, or if you are fan of American football,
so sorry, if you have an injury you will be
disabled for a couple of days. You will not able
to do the things as the way you did before, so you
need to understand that some of the things will be
difficult for you, but temporary. Okay, then we
have the third one and it's the situational and I
would like to illustrate that within the story. As
you can notice, I have an a strong accent, Costa
Rica accent. The "r" is super strong in in Costa
Rica accent. And I will like, I love to visit,
I would like to to visit Korea. And can you
imagine me talking in English with a Korean
citizen with also they have a strong accent.
Well yes, that would be a situational disability,
but I would like to clarify that is not physical,
is not mental, it's just situational. It's because
the language. And finally we have the invisible
disabilities and nobody in this call is is safe
of that because everyone has been suffer these
kind of disabilities, at any time in your life.
So that's why it's important to understand that
invisible disabilities are really important now.
And why is this important when we know what is
disability, what are the types of disabilities,
we can definitely understand what are the Internet
Disabilities. This classification implies five
main levels like Visual, Hearing, Mobility &
Dexterity, Speech and Cognitive. Being Cognitive
the most common in internet. So also when we
understand disabilities we need to understand
what will be the Governance Models. What will be
the laws that we need to cover. We talked a lot
about Web Content Accessibility Guidelines and
also I didn't, I didn't miss some of really great
talks between yesterday and today, really great
talks about different normatives, like Section
508 or WAI-ARIA, so that is great. So
if we understand what will be our governance model
in terms of the digital product that we are
creating, that will be really great, because for
example talking about United States, for example,
we need to consider International Levels, Federal
Levels or Estate levels depending on the industry.
Now taking, keeping in mind the previous
information, what will be the Best Practices in
terms of accessibility to create better sites,
to be participant in inclusive economies and also
make this kind of digital transformation? And I
would like to start saying you need to define
the status quo. And when I say that, a couple
of days back I, I needed to start working with a
project. I needed to just let some clients
that why it's important accessibility. And that's
the question that I received. Do you know how much
is the percentage of people with disabilities who
access the site? I feel that way. Why? Because
some people think that disability is just a number
and this one this is not good. So we can just not
disregard people with disabilities, because
yeah it's it's it's, is that it? No, we need to
be really inclusive when we are creating sites. So
I would like to mention this project
The Valuable 500. This product project is led by Caroline
Casey which is great you need to listen to,
listening her, listening her talking. So she is
great and she led on a specific survey with
different leaders, business leaders of great
companies and one of the the topics that she
discovered was that 6 6 66, sorry 56 percent
of the global managers that are participating
on the business plans of their companies
didn't, didn't think about disability.
And as I mentioned before is not accessibility, is
disability the main point on the agenda so you can
start working better accessible products. And I
would like to invite you to just go back one year
and try, to go work to look for the World Economic
Forum, because that was for the first time
the entire World Economic Forum talking
about inclusive business includes inclusion,  uh diversity and they talk a lot about that. And
they provide some really great recommendations
about what will be good in terms of business and
why accessibility is very important. So now going
back to the Accessibility Best Practices in
terms of our sites, what we need to do first?
Well, try to Reshape the Bias. Try to include
accessibility as part of the culture of my team
starting with me. If I did, if I uh, if I am
the leader right, because it's important to
start thinking strategically and create best
practices in our team. Now try to look for
support for executive managers. If they understand
that accessibility is important, you can all start
creating really great products. And of course
you need two advices from experts in the area,
so you will learn more about what will be the best
strategy for you and for your digital product.
Then we have the Scope. We can do a lot of things
with accessibility. We can include accessibility
in everything, but sometimes we are limited
and we have some misconceptions about that.
We can create disruptive products, innovative
products just by including accessibility.
So accessibility will be great for that.
Try to understand what is the business need,
what is what would be your audience, what type
of of project or service are you providing to
to to the clients and try to include
accessibility in all the process. Okay?
Now what what would be the cost? Well, sometimes I
heard people say, accessibility is super expensive
and yes it could be expensive, but if you
include accessibility until testing rounds,
without including since the planning,
since their requirements validation,
or since that not including in the design portion,
it will be really difficult to minimize the cost.
So it will be really expensive at
that, at that stages in the life cycle.
But if you are including best practices since the
beginning, it will be really good for your teams.
Now Test Test Test and Test that's
the most important. We cannot avoid
the, the importance that testing is the most
critical part in terms of accessibility. Why?
Because of the one hundred percent,
seventy percent of the effort and
the notification or the clarification for the
users that the site is accessible or not, depends
on manual testing strategies. So it's important
to create an specific strategy when we have
trained resources that can also provide really
good recommendations in terms of accessibility,
because it will be the specific experience of
the user, use using assistive technology and
the digital product. So we will have a real
perspective about if our site is accessible
or not. Then we have the automated tools which
is another thing that we will cover in the next
slides, but also we need to try to balance these
two strategies to create a really good process.
Now I would like to give you some tips and
tricks in order to create some user stories.
If you don't have any anything of this created in
your team, so that's the the the starting point.
So it's important to create a Diverse Persona.
When we are creating the sites we usually
design what will be our, what what type of
user we will have, what will be our audience,
right? But usually we we we don't think about
the different abilities of the users. Okay we
usually think in our in our final product, but we
are usually not think so much about the audience.
So, by having this kind of tools you will learn
what type of screen readers you will need in
order to test and also what type of checkpoints in in
design we need to apply, before to send everything
to development. So it will be really great for you
and this is a great example. This is a reference,
you can check the links below and you can check
that we have some really good practices. If we,
if we create that, you will have a really great
vision that what will be the specifications that
we need to also consider during development
process, design process, testing process,
and in the final product, okay.
Now related to WordPress,
the themes, the selection of themes,
it's really really important. Not every
theme that is trendy is accessible. Even
though if they are super shiny, if they're
they have a lot of colors and combinations
and super complex functional elements,
not all of them are accessible. So that's
why it's important to keep that in mind.
And the other thing that I would like to
mention before to proceed to the next sessions,
uh next section, is Be Aware the Lawsuits.
Why? Because usually when we are thinking
about accessibility, we think about what
will be the specific technical aspects
that we need to cover when we are creating
our product. What will be the test strategy,
what will be the requirements? However,
I would like to mention that a QA miss
will be a lawsuit. So most of the users that
impose some lawsuits to you, or to your company
are not just mentioned that the site
is inaccessible. It's because it's
they are creating the lawsuits because you
are excluding people with disabilities. So
that's why it's important to keep in mind even
the small details in terms of accessibility,
because this is really important. Now what are
the recommendations that I have for you today?
For example, if we're talking about WordPress
you will have like a Quick Start Guide.
So you will have an Accessibility Handbook. You
will find information about training resources,
you will have best practices in terms of
design designs and content creation, because
it's important to create accessible content as
well and the visual presentation of the pages
should be clear and easy to understand, even
though the digital product X is complex itself.
And then you will have some checklist testing
strategies and also you will find some, the
most common accessibility defects. So you
will be able to identify properly what will be
the strategy to follow in terms of development
or design of quality assurance, for example.
Those, those two options are, I love these two
options. I think the information that is included
in these blocks are really good and you will
find really best practices for developers, very
technical so that is great in terms to apply best
practices to existing components on your sites.
And also you will have some tools to evaluate
your site and with really great references.
Also one of the things that I like the most of
those blogs are related to some aspects to cover
public sites, because it's different when we
are working with private sites and public sites,
the exposure will be a little bit different. So
by having this reference will be really great.
Then do you remember that we talked about
about Themes? Okay we have a really great
future here. Actually when you are going
to the theme directory you will find a tag
that says Accessibility Ready. So as soon
as you select that, you will find a list
of different themes that are accessible. However,
I would like to recall that even though you are
clicking this label and you are seeing some things
that are accessible, you need to take care of
the opportunities for improvement that we can
also apply after, to select this theme. Just,
just, just keep an eye on that. Then we have some
WordPress Accessibility Tools, for example,
I would like to mention in in two ways. The
first of all, the first one is the WordPress
Accessibility Plugin. It is really good. You
can use it and integrate to your WordPress pages
and right and try to make some, some audits
using this plugin. And actually it's important
to have an specific strategy for automation. As I
mentioned before, the most important is to cover
the manual portion. But actually when we are
also using automated tools, we can cover a
really great aspects in terms of code. So in this
slide, in this slide I'm providing you some of the
best tools that I work with in the past years and
this is really great for you. And it's important
to mention that it's a combination of tools
that you can have better results. I cannot
say that just by using the WordPress Accessibility
Plugin is the one. No, probably you can use it
to mix for example, with the Axe or expert or
together with Accessibility Insights, because
this kind of tools will provide you different
reference, technical reference, so you can
have some reference from one and some reference
for others. So you can create a really great
strategy. Then based on the screen readers, one of
the most common questions that I have when I work
with different projects is what about the screen
readers? They usually ask if there is the, the,
like what is the most critical screen reader
that I need to to consider when we are creating?
Well, I can say that it depends. It depends of
the analytics of your site. For example, if the
most visited browser is Chrome so you can need
to try to design your strategy based on Chrome,
but actually there is a combination of the
screen readers that work, that works really
good with Chrome and so on. So and now in on
the screen I'm presented to you what is, sorry,
what is the best combination that you can keep in
mind when we are working with the screen readers?
Actually you need to also consider if you are
working with native applications, because it will
be a little bit different, right, in terms of of
of screen readers and the combination. It will
be different in terms of gestures, also, because
we need to use gestures and other additional tools
that we can apply to improve the accessibility.
And I will give you a gift. In this case,
Include People with Disabilities. It's
important just to don't take just
for granted that the, all the checkpoints that you
are doing at are enough. So this is a really
great page that I want to provide you. The name
of the page is Fable. So you will find people
with disabilities as part of the board of this
company, so they can provide you in real in real
time, what are the the most common defects of your
page. We, if this page has specialized users in
screen readers and magnification tools and also in
code best practices, so they can provide you the
tools you need in order to create a really great
content. Then a couple of takeaways about this
project is try to reshape your bias. Try to think
differently, try to educate yourself and try to
unlearn things because usually when we are working
in the technical part we are superstructure,
right. And we usually try to follow rules,
but in this case we need to think differently.
We need to just think in ways that that are not
common when we are talking about accessibility.
So that's important to reshape their
bias. Also always think in your users.
There, there is no more important to an honest
feedback from your, for from your users, so try to
keep in mind the user experience. What will be
the experience of an screen reader user. So you
can connect with different companies depending
of the state you are, or depending of the
country you are, there are specific like
companies or services that you can send your link
and those persons with disabilities can help you
how to validate, what is the current experience
from the from them in their site, so they can
give you really real and honest feedback about
your site so please keep in mind that option.
And also, it's important to ask for expert
advice. Why? Because sometimes when we start
creating the accessibility process we,
the learning curve is really long okay,
because we need to understand what will be the
success criteria that we need to cover in terms of
of of the development code, what will be well,
when will be enough to have the successful
criteria on, or when can do more in terms of that
success criteria. So that's, it's really important
to ask for expert advice. And definitely, and
the last one is, if you are an entrepreneur
you are a business lead, you are working
creating products, you are working creating
services, please always keep accessibility in your
agenda. Try to don't to don't avoid this comment,
this conversation, because it's really important.
You are creating opportunities to make more people
with disabilities just get a really good education
and some new job opportunities and everything
related to knowledge management, etc. So if you
are creating this kind of projects, thinking
also in inclusion, that would be really great. So
and also I would like to keep keep keep in touch
with anybody so I would like to provide my point
of contact. So that's it, thank you very much.
[Amanda] All right that was awesome Merary, I
learned, I learned a lot. Your slides were
wonderful. We do have plenty of time for
questions, so and we have a couple questions
here, but if anyone else does have questions
make sure you add them to the chat, so we can
we can ask those. So the first question is, how
would you persuade a company about the benefits
of developing and implementing an accessibility
strategy in less than five minutes? [Merary] Okay that's
a really good question and a
difficult one to answer, because one
of the the most important things for companies
is how will be my benefit, in terms of money,
right? If we are including accessibility. And when
we talk about accessibility, accessibility,
we will not receive that money during after the
first implementation. It will be with a time,
so make the different business owners or leaders
understand that vision is a little bit difficult.
But they notice with the time when we
create really good metrics, when we can
create prototypes, when we have some empathy labs,
for example, you can create also empathy labs in
your own company. So you can have real users,
real sorry, I don't want to say that, people with
disabilities just testing different sites and also
you as a owner of this product, you can test using
different tools so you can understand what is the
current behavior for different users. So based on
that experience you can create a different
atmosphere so they will able to understand,
dependent of the products. So we can and a
really great response response and then we have
just kind of wait for better responses for other
leaders, so depending on the business as well so.
[Amanda] Right, that was
less than five minutes so.
[Merary] Okay.
[Amanda] Perfect, um the next question is, as an accessibility and US 508 expert,
do you think that companies that
currently use WordPress as a CMS
or a platform to create content, can be exposed to
legal lawsuits due to their lack of accessibility?
[Merary] Oooh, that's that's a question that
is important to answer and yes, definitely
yes. So you need to take care about all details
when we are talking about CMS it's critical to
also use other type of normatives or best
practices like ATAG which is one of the
the ones that you can integrate with the
WCAG and also with the Section 508 and
try to create a best strategy uh for CMS,
but yes, you can be affected about that.
[Amanda] Okay, all right and then we've got one
more question I see right now and it is, have you
tried the latest latest version of WordPress and
did you see any major issues with accessibility?
[Merary] Well, yes I saw a couple of
things, mostly of the standards in keyboard
navigation for some functional components. And
so there is important to understand what are the
keyword navigation, best practices you can
find that information when you are using WAI-ARIA.
So there isn't a specific chapter talking
about what will be the keyword expectations
so you can use that as reference,
but yes that's the most common
like diff, I don't want to say difficult, but
uh the most common error that I noticed which
is the keyword navigation or the expected keyword
navigation for some component, fusion components.
[Amanda] Okay fabulous. Thank you for taking
the time to answer those. I also had a question,
because you talked about personas and in, I'm in
marketing and so you know we've taken the time
to talk about personas, but actually this was
very enlightening because we actually hadn't
considered access, accessibility within that
and I just was wondering, how do you go about
gathering data to incorporate disabilities into
personas and how do you prioritize you know,
as you're saying these different levels of
accessibility and different disabilities.
I know from experience developing personas
could be a full-time job in some cases, so.
[Merary] Yes well actually, one of the
best practices that I learned with the past
years is try to understand properly what what
what is what is the information included in
the WCAG guidelines. So based on the different
success criteria that we have, we also have some
specific sections that we can find
a scenario they are looking to
solve, when when we have users with these kind of
abilities or using a specific type of assistive
technology. So based on that experience and
also providing just the site to a specific
projects that include people with disabilities
so they also can provide you some reference.
And one of the other things that that I noticed as
well was that include people with disabilities in
your team, so they have a different perspective,
so they can provide you some reference about how
they access the site. Because sometimes when we
are working with the screen readers and everything
we have our own experience right, but we are
not users from of this assistive technology so
by having users that are experts with assistant
technology, we also have some different ambitions.
But also I have some lists that we have
already created also I can talk with you
later and share with you some information
so that that can help you out with that.
[Amanda] Okay wonderful wonderful, thank
you very much. Again I don't see any
more questions right here, but you did an
amazing job so much, so much good information.
So I just want to say thank you so much
again and thank you to everyone for attending this
session with Merary and I. You can continue
the conversation on the WordPress Accessibility
Day site on the page for this talk. Merary
provided her contact information as well so and
you can continue to follow the event conversation
on Twitter @wpad2020 and #wpaccessibilityday.
So don't forget to attend the next talk
which is The Case for Captions with Abha Thakor
which will be actually on a different
YouTube stream. The link is posted there
in the YouTube chat and you can also
access it from the home page of the
WordPress Accessibility Day site. So we'll be
hopping on over there in about 20, 23ish minutes,
so yeah we will see you there after
the break. Thanks again everyone.
[Merary] Thank you very much, bye.